See, this came right here.
Yeah. Yeah. Basically,
otherwise,
Well, good morning and welcome to the Social Service
and, uh, community Select Committee.
Uh, thank you for coming in this morning.
Uh, so look, uh, I wanna take an opportunity to, um, just
for the purpose of those watching,
uh, to introduce yourselves.
Um, and then, uh, we'll, we'll go first to the, uh,
report on Oman Children Care Complaints.
That was in 2019 to 2023. So
Kia, and thank you for the opportunity to be here.
Uh, my name's John Allen, and, uh, I'm three months
or four months, uh, into a role as Chief Ombudsman.
Uh, with me is Emma Leach, uh, on this side, uh,
Emma is the Senior Assistant Ombudsman, uh, responsible
for most things, including elements of, uh, the two reports,
uh, that we are going to, uh, speak to.
And on this side is, so Zoe Heley,
Zoe leads our Proactive Investigations team, uh,
that actually did a lot of the, uh, the on the ground work,
uh, that is reflected in these reports.
Thank you very much. Well,
perhaps if I just make a few very preliminary remarks, uh,
in relation to these reports
and in relation to the Children and Care report.
First, uh, clearly this was a report completed
by my predecessor, uh, Peter Bocher, uh, and the t uh,
and it describes challenges within Ari.
Uh, the language used is confronted.
Uh, the, then Chief Ombudsman said that OT needs
to change at a scale, really required
by a government agency,
which is a fairly extraordinary sort of observation.
Uh, he said that, uh, the practice
and process improvements
that he had suggested in the report, uh,
would make a material difference.
But there was significant ground to be made up
by the organization to rebuild trust
and confidence, uh, in the communities, uh,
which they serve.
He did identify some areas of good practice, uh,
and you'll see that in the case studies, uh,
that are included, uh, in the report.
Uh, and he did recognize the importance, uh, of ot,
uh, and the role that they play in our community with some
of our most vulnerable, uh, children and whanau.
So it wasn't all bad news, uh,
but it was certainly pretty confronting.
Uh, the report focused on a range of areas.
Uh, one was reports of concern.
And reports of concern are obviously back in the papers at
the moment, uh, with the inquest, uh, into Malachi Beck.
Uh, and in that context, failures to record reports
of concern and adequate assessment of reports of concern,
failure to consider multiple reports in a holistic manner.
So those were significant.
It considered uplifts and placements
and some of the challenges that OT faced in that area
in relation to inadequate search for suitable placements
with whanau, failing to seek the views of tamari in terms of
kotahi as well, in terms of where they might like to live
and be located, uh,
and how dealing with matters of urgency with, uh,
the non notified interim orders, uh, from the courts.
So there was significant issues in that space.
And another area that he particularly focused on, uh,
was the disability community.
Uh, and the challenges faced by parents
and children with dis disability, uh, in the, uh,
context of placement, uh, by ot.
And the findings specifically that he made, uh, in
that regard, uh, was that no child
and no parent, uh, should be disadvantaged as a consequence
of disability in terms of the quick decisions, uh, as
to placement, which was a position that OT have now adopted,
uh, in their policies.
So those were the sorts of findings that this report,
uh, identified.
Uh, the case studies, I think, make for powerful reading,
um, to identify how
that actually plays out in the real lives, uh, of people,
uh, in our communities.
What I'm pleased to be able to tell the committee, uh, is
that OT have taken this report extremely seriously,
that OT have responded at an organizational level in terms
of their practice and processes
and the way in which they are operating, uh,
their organization to address the challenges, uh,
which the former Chief Ombudsman, uh, raised.
Uh, they have been engaging
with our office on a regular basis
to report on their progress.
And we have been engaging in deep dives with the office,
uh, on areas of particular importance,
uh, and concern.
So I do believe that there is both the intention
and some evidence of progress, uh, that these,
this report will make a difference for OT
and the important work that they do.
That said, it's relatively early days.
Uh, there are still complaints being received in our office
in relation to elements of OTs work, which in itself is not
that surprising, given the, the spread pressures, uh,
and challenges with which, uh, the organization engages,
but which is just evidence
and a reminder, uh, that we need to keep our eye on this
and we need to keep progressing.
So with those opening observations, Mr.
Chairman, I'm happy to take any questions, uh,
which I might have to ask my colleagues to,
to answer given my relative newness, uh, in this space.
Well, thank, thank you very much for that, uh, very good,
uh, introduction to the topic.
Um, so going to members, uh, who have, um,
which needs all this, um, I, I'll start.
Um, um, look, I'm really interested in, in how you are going
to, um, monitor the,
the most effective way that you think you can monitor this
and what is, what is clearly a very complex area,
and you're dealing with humans with a lot of complexities,
uh, both at the individual and,
and the sort of broader community and family level.
How you gonna, how you, how you are going
to ensure you can monitor the delivery of services within
that complex human Yeah. Environment?
Yeah, it, it is a challenge.
Luckily, we are not alone in the task of Oversighting.
Uh, Ari, uh, the Independent Children's Monitor,
uh, is responsible for monitoring a lot of the outcomes
that are being delivered.
And you might recall that they published a report relatively
recently, uh, on the outcomes that were being delivered for
Maori, uh, who of course comprise, uh,
a significant component of the, uh, children
and young people that are in care, uh,
and are engaged with, um, ot.
So we have that group.
Uh, and we also have the, uh, children's commissioner
who acts as an advocate for children.
Uh, so we have a sort of monitoring agency, uh,
an advocacy agency, and ourselves,
and I suppose we see ourselves as an investigative agency,
uh, to be able to, the three
of us work very closely together, uh, as we're required
to do by the legislation.
Uh, and we engage, uh, you know, we share information, um,
across our organizations in relation to ot.
So I do think that that model is a, um, well-balanced,
uh, monitoring, uh, capability, uh, for
the government and for Parliament
and for the people of New Zealand.
Uh, and I do believe on the basis of my short time, uh,
that it is operating successfully, specifically
to your question in terms of how we will respond.
Uh, one, uh, we will continue to raise the profile
of our office with people in care, uh,
with the families involved, so that they know that they can,
if they feel that things are not going right, uh,
raise those matters with us as an independent body,
uh, for investigation.
'cause I think that in many ways becomes the sort of tester,
uh, often or the early sign o of things that might
otherwise might actually be failing systemically,
although we're only looking at it
through a particular, uh, lens.
Uh, the second thing we will do is we will continue our
engagement with ot, uh,
including the deep dive type engagements
that we are undertaking, uh,
because I do believe that they are having an effect in terms
of both the culture and practice of that organization.
Thank you. Uh, question Menno,
Morina, um, um, Reina, John, um,
and, uh, and into your new role, albeit, um, um, you know,
a few months, um, already, I'm pleased to hear the,
your observations and,
and, uh, just noting some
of the remarks that you've made already.
Um, I like the sound of deep dive
and regular reporting, those things.
I think, um, that
when the relationship works really well, people are prepared
to just say even to, to reveal and to seek help.
And so I'm, I'm appreciative of that.
Um, um, John,
what then it comes from me anyway, is what the capacity
that's required even in your team, uh, to be able to,
to, uh, continue this.
Because I don't think it's a, I mean, it, it gets
to this point because people are pushed to complain.
And, and so if the, if it never came to light,
these things would still be just carrying on in,
in the saddest way.
So this is a good thing.
I mean, it's, it's perverse, but it is a good thing.
Uh, the truth is liberating,
and I think it's a very good thing.
So yeah, just in terms of your team, your capacity, um,
and that of your team to be able to keep, um,
because the minute you deep dive, you know,
then you've gotta go another 60 meters.
That's how deep it goes.
And so, um, and to, and to maintain the engagement
and then build trust and confidence,
because you also open those, sorry, Mr.
Chief, it's long call It All Bit.
Just wanted to make those remarks
and put those questions as openly as I can to you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for the, uh, for the observations.
Going to your first point, which is about the importance
of illuminating things as a vehicle for addressing them.
Uh, that is really what the role of this office is.
Uh, if you go to the legislation, the Ombudsman Act, the,
uh, uh, the Official Information Act, the suite
of other legislative frameworks that we operate under the,
the founding principle is that by shining a light on things,
uh, you identify challenges that can then be addressed,
and you build trust
and confidence for people, uh, in the organizations
of the state, uh,
and in their ability
to engage in processes like parliamentary processes
and lawmaking, uh, to be able to be, uh, more involved, uh,
citizens in those, in those things.
And therefore, presumably trust the outcomes
of those processes, uh, more than they might otherwise.
So, uh, thank you for the recognition
of the importance of those things.
'cause it is the foundation of the work that we do in terms
of the, uh, capabilities of the organization
and the capacity of the organization.
Uh, we are lucky enough to have advice from a, uh,
committee p manata, uh, which we have put together
to advise, uh, the Chief Ombudsman, whoever
that might be at a particular time.
Uh, and those people are drawn from, uh,
senior ranks across Maori Dam, uh,
and are people who have both lived experience
and deep Mama, uh, in the community.
Uh, I have found already in my time that the, the,
the opportunity to engage with them, both in terms of,
uh, relationship building, uh, with the, we Maori across,
uh, uh,
and in terms of some of the substance of the engagements
and thinking about the issues that you raise
and other issues that are impacting, um,
has been extraordinarily helpful.
So that's one element of what we do.
Uh, we are also growing our own capability, uh,
within the organization in both tikanga, uh, and,
and t Maori more generally, uh, to enable us to be able
to support the Kopa as we move forward.
And we have specific resourcing, um,
which is engaged in the children in care space, uh,
to ensure that we can continue to meet the growing,
as you say, or well hopefully won't be growing.
But nonetheless, uh, the demands for
investigation as we move forward.
Can I just also add as well that we have, um,
developed a training program for our staff
that focuses on trauma-based care, understanding trauma, um,
and we've also implemented a professional support system
for our staff as well, so
that they can receive professional supervision, um,
for the work that they're doing
and the impact that, that might have on them as well.
Thank you. And your,
your comments are chief about sunlight.
Reminds me of that Louis Brande quote.
Uh, sunlight is the best as and victims. Yeah.
Quite, uh, supplementary, I think.
Oh, um, not, not, uh, primary. Primary. Okay. Thank you.
Uh, will,
Primary? Primary,
yep. Um, Kilda,
thank you very much for coming today.
Uh, I remember right back when we, um,
came into this committee.
We had the chief executive, um, responding some
to some questions that I was asking around the description
that the change level of change required was profound.
And then in subsequent reports, the scale is referred to
and the urgency.
I'm really concerned that we've seen significant cuts
to orang TAM staffing
and restructuring over 400 roles, cuts
to community providers.
And a damning auditor general's report about those decisions
that are being made about cuts to community providers.
And that the fact
that the organization didn't know the impact that
that would have on children,
and then the most recent report that they've uploaded saying
that there is a risk, they're not going to be able
to meet their targets in terms of responding
to the increased number of reports of concern.
So, while I'm heartened by some
of the progress you're saying that they're making in terms
of this other significant things are happening that
I believe, and others are saying, uh,
children will be harmed more as a result of these, uh,
things and problems in the system.
So, um, what are you doing about more recent, um,
developments in that space?
Well, you'll have seen in the report, uh,
that we are discussing this morning, uh, that, um,
the former Chief Ombudsman laid down a widow challenge, uh,
to the government, uh, to make sure
that the organization was able
to address the challenges, uh, that it faces.
Uh, it's not for me to comment on political judgments.
Uh, that's not the role of the ombudsman.
Uh, we are a pa an officer of parliament,
and we try hard, hard to stay out of, uh, political matters.
But I would say to you that I am heartened in my engagements
with the chief exec, acting Chief executive of ot, um,
over the period that I have been in this role
by the clear priorities
and focus, uh, that he has on the things that
can most effectively shift the dial on the issues
that you've been raising and which this report touches on.
So, uh, they do operate in a complex environment.
I think we all operate in complex
environments at the moment.
Uh, my my view is that the recommendations
that were made in the report by Mr.
Boha are within that context, manageable
for the organization, not withstanding, they're not on the,
in themselves sufficient.
So Mr.
Boha wasn't suggesting, I don't think that all of the, uh,
operational changes he was suggesting would,
while they would significantly advance the practice
and improve the practice
and performance of the organization, I don't think he would,
I'm speaking for him, which is not a good idea.
But nonetheless, I, I don't think he was suggesting that
that was all that was needed to transform the performance
of the organization,
but it would be a significant step forward.
So I suppose it's in that spirit
recognizing the wider challenges,
recognizing the complexity, um, that I can say to you
that I'm feeling more confident.
Uh, that is because I'm seeing
progress on the specific initiatives that Mr.
Bocher outlined,
and I do believe that they are making a positive impact on
the performance of the organization,
and I'm seeing focus from the chief executive, uh,
and I believe that's appropriate given the challenges
that he's trying to address with his colleagues.
Just one supplementary on that.
Thank you for that, um, response.
I suppose, um, given that urgency
and what the result of, um, insufficient progress
or change actually means in this context, which is
children harmed, um, how we,
how will you measure whether that earnest effort
actually translates
to meaningful change, um, in the outcomes?
So how, how will you, um, follow up on that
as an organization or one of the, is it one
of the other entity's responsibilities?
Well, in terms of, uh, reports of concern, for example,
uh, we are confident that there has been
progress made on reports of concern, particularly in terms
of the issue of multiple complaints
not being treated in a holistic way.
Uh, so with the new technologies that they are deploying,
uh, there is the opportunity for that information
to be shared more easily
and more fully as I understand it, uh, across the,
uh, the organization.
So I do think that there is some progress being
made in terms of,
I can, if I could, so using that example, um,
the technology allows it to happen.
How will you check whether that is in fact happening?
Yeah, so we have, we have a number
of mechanisms that we can use.
One is that we're in, in touch with them, as I say,
to monitor performance against
recommendations that were made.
And they are continuing to report to us as recently
as March, I think it was the most recent report,
um, on that progress.
So we will continue to see that progress
and to comment on that progress.
We will continue with these deep dives
that I've talked about.
Uh, and we have the ability, uh, through own motion, um,
investigation, so we don't have to wait for a complaint.
Mm. If we have the view that there is something that needs
to be looked at again, uh, then we can do that, uh,
on our own initiative and we will. Mm.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
And thank you for the sensitivity that your
and these matters and
Talking with.
And so I just wanna talk about young people
and the importance of their voice. Yeah,
Yeah.
We, um, part of the Royal Commission of Inquiry
recommendations was that there was an independent agency
that advocated for children and children's voice and care,
and that funding has actually stopped, um, in this last,
um, budget round.
So I am interested to know how that is going
and how these children are going
to have an independent advocate
to support their voice to be heard.
Well, um, one,
this report clearly identifies the importance of
that voice being heard, uh,
and clearly challenges OT to shift its practices
to ensure that that voice is heard, uh, in a variety
of different situations.
So, so the report certainly supports the concern
and ambition, uh, that you have described.
Uh, the office of the Children's Commissioner, uh, is
intended in my understanding of that office, uh,
to be an advocate for children, um, not just in care,
of course, but, but, uh, children generally.
But I know that for the, uh, current, uh, leader of
that team, uh, that the children
and care component is a particularly important component
that she has been, um, very focused on.
So I do think there is a, uh, a,
a specialist advocacy agency
that is engaging more effectively or, or,
or is engaging reasonably effectively in that way.
Uh, the last point that I would make is
that we are working hard to raise the profile
of our office, uh, with young people.
And again, you'll see that reflected in the
report, uh, from Mr.
Nacha. Uh, the word ombudsman isn't one that sort
of resonates necessarily with, uh, kotahi, uh, or Tamari.
Uh, and, uh, you know,
Scandinavian origins can be a bit opaque at times to, uh,
to people here in, but,
but, uh, what we are trying to do is get the message out
that, that we are here, uh, we listen, uh,
and we are able to act, and we are independent,
and we are confidential, and we are non, uh, adversarial.
We're an inquisitorial, uh, process.
Uh, all of those things, I think hopefully
can enable young people as they get to understand
what we might be able to do for them, uh, to engage
with us more effectively.
Thank, thank you very much, SHA.
That is the time we have available for that piece of work.
We, we will now shift to the next one, which we also have
with you, which is the report of the Osman RIA,
timeliness obligations, compliance
and Practice, buying an Order, housing New Zealand.
Thank you Zoe, Mr.
Um, here with us for that as well. Sorry,
Zoe. Alright.
Um, as a look, if if maybe the same format,
it would be helpful, um, in your hands. Again.
Uh, thank you Kiana.
Uh, and, um, I've been joined Ainsley, no, no, Ainsley.
Um, so, uh, so Ainsley on this side
and Ainsley did actually lead the work that's, uh, that's,
uh, in this report.
So, so just, just contextually, uh,
this report was a response to what
was being presented in the media and what Mr.
Boha was then concerned about, which were criticisms
of the official Information Act as becoming effective,
ineffective from the media point of view, uh,
in their ability to, um, uh, to, uh,
get the information they needed to be able
to tell the stories that need to be told to our people,
to engage them in political
and other processes, uh, so that he wanted to test, uh,
whether or not that was the case.
And he investigated a range of organizations,
as you will see, one of which was Kai Aura.
Uh, and in those investigations,
he was asking himself the question, uh, is there
activity within these organizations which is
trying effectively to use this legislation
to defeat in some way the objects, uh, of the legislation,
uh, in the context of Kura?
Uh, the answer was very clearly, no,
there was nothing of that kind.
In fact, he said, no, there is no evidence of Kura misusing,
uh, the OIA, uh,
and as you will have seen, uh, in the report, uh, that he
that has, was prepared, uh, there was actually some examples
of good practice, uh, within that agency, uh,
which he was encouraged by.
There were a few areas that he did focus on.
Uh, he focused on the question of engagement with ministers,
which is always a, a complicated, uh, question
because obviously the, um, uh,
cabinet manual requires ministers to be able
to operate on a no surprises basis.
So there is a need for agencies to, uh, notify, uh,
ministers in relation to, um, oia.
Uh, but, uh, it's important to recognize
that the decision in relation to, uh, those, uh,
process out of those processes still risks with the ce,
uh, of the agency.
And those sorts of engagements should be able
to be managed within the, uh, up to 20 days.
Uh, that's, uh, that's prescribed, uh,
within the legislation.
So there was a bit of a discussion about that,
and I'm happy to talk about that.
There was, the use of extensions, uh,
was a particular issue here,
because at that time, about 50%, I think it was, of the,
um, oi requests that were going
to Korra were being extended,
and they had a sort of mandatory period, a sort
of default period.
They were extending them for about 20 days, just sort of
as a, as a sort of default.
Uh, and so, uh, you'll have seen that the, uh, that, uh, Mr.
Bocher, uh, was critical of that approach, uh, both
as being inappropriate, uh, in sort of commonsensical terms,
but also inappropriate in law, uh,
and, uh, was made it very clear that you can only extend
for legitimate purposes
and you can only extend for a reasonable period.
And there shouldn't be a sort of blanket approach to, uh, to
how that, um, how that was done.
Uh, and then, uh, what else, what other areas did he have?
Oh, the other area that he talked about was,
was the question of communicating a decision
before the process of reaching the decision had been, um,
had been finalized.
Uh, and that, that's a concern
because it potentially can, could be seen as, as, uh,
playing to the, uh, getting a completed result
even though it wasn't completed.
And even though the information then wasn't, uh, hadn't
yet been provided.
So you'll see the analysis of that.
So those were the sort, those were the three sorts of areas,
but as I say, there was some good, uh,
there was some good practice.
And the, and, and I think the positive news again, uh, is
that ka Laura took this seriously and have acted on it.
And just, just on the question of extensions,
so they had about 50% extensions in the report,
you'll have seen that had gone down to about 25%
by the time the report was completed.
It's now gone down to 12%.
So, so they have changed their processes
and they are seeing outcomes as a consequence.
Well, thank you very much. Um,
I'm gonna take the opportunity to ask one question.
Cool. It's something that's, that's been
of interest for me for a number of years.
I have to confess that it's the, um, there,
there's a 20 days that specifies in legislation
for IA requests to be responding to.
Um, but, um, from, I'm just have a memory,
I think it's without undue delay,
and it seems a number of agencies seem to take the 20 days
as a deadline as opposed to a maximum.
Yeah. I just wonder if you have any comments on that. You
Are right.
Agencies do take, uh, 20 days as a, as a, uh,
deadline and not a maximum.
Uh, and they're wrong. It's a, it's, it's, it's not
what the law requires.
Uh, and so, uh, I,
I think just about every report I've read since I've been in
this office prepared by Mr.
Bocher, um, commented on this, uh,
and commented on the, uh, impropriety of this, uh,
and commented on the need for, uh, agencies to, uh,
get there as quickly as, as practicable.
It's interesting when you read the Public Service
Commission, um, data, uh, that comes out, so that,
that's the core public service.
So it's not, it's not everything, but
nonetheless, the core public service.
And you may have seen the data
that came out on the 13th of March.
They, um, they said that the average time to respond
to an OIA request, um, in that report, uh,
was 13 days.
So that does suggest that there are agencies
that are doing it well, uh, and are getting onto it, uh,
and, um, being, uh, timely about it.
But your, your point is well made, uh,
and it deserves repeating every time you, uh, uh,
we appear in front of you.
So thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Let's, let's keep getting that message out there, Helen.
Um, I've got two. I have to pick one.
Um, the first thing is, thanks, it's great report.
And I wanted to know, um, I could see
that it had had impact in that organization in terms
of just picking up on the extensions.
Um, it is clearly just an example.
You've sort of gone on, is that right?
You've gone into one, but it could be any agency.
Um, is there, uh, is there a satisfaction that this is
true of all agencies
or are you going to, is your plan to do, um,
this like an audit every now
and then on an organization
so everybody picks up good habits.
Um, and then the second part of that question is,
what about the quality of the answers?
Did you look,
'cause that must be quite a hard thing to audit
people sidestepping and answering the question,
but not answering the question.
Is there any capacity to look at that?
Because I would say that's your more risky area.
I'll ask, I'll ask the investigator to like,
to answer the, the, the second part
of your question in terms of the first part
of your question, this report was one of seven
agencies that we investigated.
Yes. In this particular exercise.
Um, I've just, uh, uh, completed signing up.
I think we've completed, haven't we?
All the, uh, about six local government agencies
that we've done relatively recently.
So the answer is yes.
You're keeping up rolling it
Out. We move around.
Rolling.
Good. It does, it's a whole team. Yeah.
And we've made a commitment
to undertake regular practice reviews every year.
And so that includes central and
Local government. Fantastic.
Yeah. Correct.
Now in terms Of, So
the, the second part of your question, so, um,
the actual decision, that's the role
of the complaints function of the office.
So the practice investigations won't really look at the
actual decision of an OAA request.
What we do do is look at how that OAA request was processed.
And we do that by looking at, um, a file review of,
of particular files.
But we also look and at, uh, a pillar of
what these reports look at is performance monitoring.
And within that performance monitoring,
we are looking at the agencies wanting to do, uh,
we encourage them to do their own quality assurance.
So you'll see in a number of the reports, we will be, uh,
if they don't do that quality assurance themselves
to start doing that quality assurance to pick, um, a sample
of OAA responses in a particular period
and go through that process themselves
and make, you know, assure themselves
that they've answered the question.
Is it was context provided, was, um, you know, grammar.
Okay. And was it clear?
So that's, that's how we kind of cover those two angles.
I hope I've answered question. Okay.
I think so, yeah. I, I think the, the two other points,
um, we often use, uh, surveys, uh, to go out to the public
or to the organization that people that work to deal
with the organization to get a sense of how they feel,
uh, that things are going.
We often interview the staff, um, of the organization
or survey the staff of the organization as to
what they think the attitude of their leadership.
And again, you'll see that in the, uh, report.
Yeah, the culture, uh, the attitude
of the leadership is towards, uh, towards openness.
'cause that's a pretty good indicator of,
uh, of how things are going.
Uh, so, so there are a whole range
of techniques that are being used.
Have you ever, sorry, is that alright? Sorry.
Um, have you ever done something
where you've compared two sources
for the same information? So I
Have heard That if I ask the police in one area
and I ask them in another for the same information,
I'll get a different timeline
and a different exposure of information. Yeah.
Yeah. So, so we try, what we do is we look at is, uh,
John mentioned we get our information from a range of areas
and the larger the, um, organization
and depending on how they set up their OAA function, um,
we will look at the OAA responses from various branches
to be able to compare.
But, um, with kind Aura, they operated a mix model.
So, you know, we were looking at
that specifically within Korra.
So, uh, but we get our information from a number
of sources, staff survey.
We speak to a large amount of staff within an agency.
The C chief executive, um, is also spoken to,
so in the public survey.
So we get a lot of information
and we also do those far reviews
and read all the policies and just to
Check that you are seeing if it's manipulative.
Absolutely. Yeah. Thank you. Um, if I, well,
if it's written down, if, uh, so, so the record keeping,
which is also a big part of what we look at
and you'll see in this report
and the number of, uh, pretty much all our reports.
We also comment on, uh,
information management and record keeping.
'cause if you don't have the record, it's uh, you, you know,
record keeping and an efficient OAA per, uh,
process go hand in hand. And
You've criticized them for
that in this report, haven't you?
We did, yeah. Thank you. Yeah, I, I've actually,
If there are gaps in the record, we,
it's hard for us to yeah.
To understand what went on, uh,
in the decision making process.
Uh, so we, we pick that up if it's, thank you.
If there are gaps. Thank you for that. Yeah.
I, I actually have a couple supplemental
Off the back of that, just the information management
Side of it. Yeah. Um,
and ba basically
information creation side of it as well.
I mean, it obviously varies across organizations in terms of
how good their internal systems are
for collecting information and storing information.
Any comments on that and and respect of this report?
Well, there, there were, uh, as, as we've just said
because, uh, we found practice that wasn't, um, you know, up
to scratch in terms of the, of the record keeping.
Uh, again, there seems to have been progress in that space,
if I understand it correctly, uh, with the, uh,
with automation of their, some of their processes and,
and documentation storage mechanisms that they now,
that they're now utilizing.
So I think that is being addressed.
We do find this commonly, uh, in organizations where,
uh, the material that is being used to frame a decision
is either not adequately described, uh,
in the document or,
or the document is not adequately stored, uh, in a manner
that enables it to be retrievable.
Uh, this is particularly complex.
I mean, the, the question that was raised just
before about getting different responses from different
areas of an organization,
the police I think was the one that was being used there.
Uh, but it is, is, is common.
Um, it's, it's very, well, it, it seems to be difficult
for a lot of organizations with devolved centers
of operation, uh, around the country to be able
to aggregate data in a timely and, um, and appropriate way.
And sometimes we have to report that, um, to, uh,
the appropriate name of the people public.
The the public. Oh,
the AR archive archive, the chief archivist.
That's it. I knew I was, I was, I was scrambling round
for, for the title.
Uh, so I hope the archivist isn't watching this,
and if you are, I apologize.
Uh, so that we, we often, uh, refer these sorts of matters
to the chief archivist
because it is a, it is a requirement, uh,
that there's appropriate record keeping
of decision making within, uh, government
and local government agencies.
And I have one, one more neatly comes off the back
of your comments about a devolved centers of operation.
But I'm interested is also is,
is devolved into other organizations.
So these, I think across, across governments aiming
to get more services delivered in the community
by other organizations apart from the government.
Yeah. So partnering with them, how, what challenges,
uh, are, are there in terms of this i a process in terms of
that service delivery?
Well, the OIA only applies to organizations
as listed in the schedules to that act.
And those are not by
and large, uh, private sector organizations that, um, that,
uh, you know, might be partnering, uh,
with a government agency.
Uh, so that is an issue, uh,
and, uh, that does from time to time constrain our ability
to look, you know, to, to provide information
or for people to obtain information.
Um, we are pretty active in, uh, suggesting, uh,
when legislation goes through the house, uh, that, uh,
the oi legislate, you know, where we think the oi, uh,
framework should apply
or the Ombudsman Act framework should apply.
The OMB Ombudsman Act framework applies.
We can, can actually use a little more generous generously,
I think, uh, to widen our jurisdiction in some instances
of those sorts of contractor type arrangements.
Uh, but the OI is quite specific.
Thank you, Dr. David. Nice to see you again. John.
David, good to see you. Welcome to the house. Yeah.
Just a, a little question around redactions,
following on from what others have said.
Uh, is there a way of looking into the appropriateness
and legitimacy of redactions?
Because obviously you have a material effect on
any outcome. Yep.
Uh, so the answer, the answer to that is complaints.
Uh, so, so if you don't think
that it's an appropriate redaction, ask us, uh,
and we will look at it
and we will make a determination, uh, whether
or not it is appropriate.
Okay. So I guess my answer is whether
or not you actually look at themselves
and review that process
because, you know, what's the extent
to the inappropriateness or,
So the answer to that is yes, we do.
Okay. So the, the answer to that is, well,
when we investigate those issues, uh, we ask
for the information in an unredacted form, uh,
and then we make an assessment of the reasonableness
of the decision that has been taken.
I mean, these aren't easy decisions always.
I mean, you are balancing, I don't know.
I mean, you're balancing privacy against
public interest, for example.
I mean, those, those are quite challenging issues, uh,
to have to, um, to discuss.
But, uh, that's exactly what we do in those situations.
So what I would say to you is, if, if,
if you receive a redacted document
and you don't believe that those redactions
Were Reasonable, were reasonable, uh,
then the off the place
to come is the Ombudsman's office. Yeah.
That provides some comfort.
Thank you. Correct. Thank you.
Thank you. I don't see Peter have any more bids.
It's, yeah, it's been really interesting.
I'd love to ask more about your role.
We'll do it at some of the more appropriate time. Cool.
But it's just, it's a fascinating role.
Thank you. It is. Thank, thank you very much for, um,
for appearing for this morning.
Um, thank you for your work. You do.
And, uh, may the sunlight keep shining.
Thank you very Much. Thank.